So now we got started
with that if field on a step
to ensure that a step runs even if a previous step failed.
Now the if field is also available on job level
so that we can add it to jobs instead of just steps.
And to show this at a concrete example,
let's say we have a new job here, which I'll name report
which will run on ubuntu-latest.
And where I have a step called output information
where I simply run some echo command here
where I say "something went wrong."
And then let's say we actually output
something across multiple lines
and we then output the GitHub context object like this.
So this is now a new step in a new job
and my goal is to run this job
only if some other job failed.
Now, if that's the goal, we can add a if check here
and use this special failure function
to make sure that this job will run if any other job failed
because failure will return true here
if any other job failed,
and only then this job will be executed.
That's the idea here.
So now with that added, we can create a new commit
"added conditional job"
and then push this to the repository.
Now there, this workflow of course is now triggered
and what you'll notice is that now report here
is actually skipped.
This I can hear signals that it was skipped.
Now it was skipped because the way we configured it
actually runs this job in parallel to all the other jobs.
That's why it's also shown visually below the other jobs.
It runs in parallel.
That means that it's started right at the beginning
of the workflow run.
And there of course, no other job has failed yet.
So GitHub is not waiting with this report job
until all other jobs have succeeded or failed.
Instead, it will execute report right away.
And there, this failure condition simply is not met.
So this alone won't do the trick.
Instead of our goal is to run this job
only if any other job failed,
we must add the needs key here
and then need both the lint job.
So this first job here as well as the deploy job
which is the last job in line after build and test.
So now we add these two jobs
as prerequisites for the report job
and therefore GitHub Actions will delay the execution
of the report job until these other jobs have finished.
And therefore now it will evaluate
if any other job in front of that job has failed.
And it will not just look at lint and deploy,
but instead at the whole chain of jobs
that might belong to these jobs.
For example, deploy only runs after build ran
and build only runs after test ran
and GitHub Actions will look at all these jobs
when looking for failures when we set it up like this.
So therefore now, if we create a new commit
"fixed conditional job"
and we push this to our repository.
You will see that now this graphic here changed.
Now report clearly depends on lint
and the result of this entire job chain.
And now we will see that when testing fails,
when this test job fails, the report job therefore executes.
So lint succeeded.
That does not trigger report to run, of course,
but if test fails, then you will see
that report starts executing
because ultimately deploy was skipped because test failed.
And as mentioned, the entire chain is evaluated
and therefore the report job executed
and output that information as requested.
And here as a side note, we're just seeing object
because I forgot to turn this into adjacent string,
so into text that contains the data information.
But that's just a side note,
not related to the if statement.
Instead, this is how we can use the if statement on a job.
And of course you're not limited to just failure,
success, canceled, so to these main functions,
but here you could also add other conditions.
You could, for example, check the output of another job
or do anything you want.
Your imagination is basically the limit here.